Unit 1 The global tapestry: 

Big idea #1:

Song China justified rule thru Confucianism (civil service examination) and imperial bureaucracy -> appointed officials carry out policies across large empire

Budhism continued to shape Chinese society -> result of outside influence go in India ; ) 

Chan Buddhism -> Chinese Buddhism -> spread to neighboring regions cultural diffusion

Song economy flourished : )

Big thing was the bureaucracy was there but song expanded it to consolidate power

Song has the CHAMPA RICEEEEEEEEEEEEEE -> made grand canal : ))))

Big idea #2:

As Abbasid Caliphate is getting falling apart. New islamic political entities get created -> Dehli Sultanate, Mamluk Sultanate -> different from Abbasid bc they were turkic!!!!! These new guys r Dar Al Islam!!

Islam spreading bc of military expansion Dehli sultanate
Islam spread thru merchant activity -> Silk Road revival trade cultural diffusion
West Africa examplee 
Algebra + Trif created by Islam ppl
Also translated greek classics into arabic -> fuel renaissance
Transferred India mathemtics to europeans
Adopted paper making from china -> helped facilitate transfer into Europe

Big Idea #3:

Hinduism, Budhism, Islam deeply influence state building in South and Southeast Asia

In South Asia Dehli Sultanate -> traditionally the Indians were Hindu when leader of Dehli sultanate it was this massive hindu to muslim tiny. They paid tax called Jizhya conversions were for social mobility. Never able to maintain efficient govn bc of consolidating power issues

VJaraghara empire two brothers sent to south to claim stuff for Dehli but converted back to Hinduism and started new empire. 

Merchants introduced Hinduism/Budhissm in south east Asia: Srivijaya Hindu kingdom and they prospered by taxing ships using sea lanes. Mahjapahid kingdom -> Buddhist kingdom controlled trade routes

Big Idea #4:

Various civilization of the Americas developed strong states, large urban centers, complex belief systems

Cahokia, Aztecs -> Maya before Tenochtitlan -> Ziggurat’s, Inca : )

Aztecs had tribute
Aztec empire decentralized state!!!!!!!!
Continuity brought over from Maya
Local govn extract tribute : )
Human sacrifice carried over from Maya

Big Idea #5:

African state building facilitated through participation in trade networks and religion

-> Great Zimbabwe . Agriculture and gold they participated in India Ocean Trade network

They got connected to all these places!!!!

Swahili Zimbabwe language indigenous Bantu and Arabic this is caused by merchant mixing this cultural diffusion!!!!

Capital city great Zimbabwe is massivE!

One difference from African states other ones was Ethiopia, this was a Christian kingdom! -> consolidated power with monumental architecture

Big Idea #6:

State building in Europe was characterized by religious belief, feudalism, decentralized monarchies!

Roman Catholic Church stupid important!

Within Europe there is strong muslim presence in Iberian Peninsula (Spain) -> where they transferred texts

Muslims and Jews who lived there were ejected by Ferdinand / Isabella kicking out

European states de-damn-centralized!!!! No large empire

Characterized by feudalism -> king granted land to Nobels lord, in exchange for service / tribute to king, lords hire knights, peasantry work land, make produce for lord tied to land. This is the manorial system!!!! -> Manor is system that contain a whole village. Many Serfs never leave there manor. 

In agriculture Europeans made three-field-system. Crops rotated thru 3 different fields one remained fallow move along and change field. More food pop growth -> more power. 



Unit 2 Networks of Exchange:
Big Idea #1:

Networks of exchange expanded in geographical scope and led to increasing interactions between states

-> Got Silk Roads (luxury goods) silk and porcelain, as trade routes grow in popularity cities on trade routes grow bc of their importance of stuff in facilitating road Kazgar, Samarkand

Facilitated by innovation in transportation too: Caravanserai -> series of ins/ guesthouses act a day travel apart merchant get food and stuff : )

New animal tech, yokes, saddle, stirrups 

Commercial tech: money economy first developed in China -> paper money! 

New forms of credit! 

Indian Ocena Network:
Spices from Southeast Asia, enslaaved ppl from Africa

Lanteen sails, magnetica compass, astrolabe, Chinese junk Arab dhal helped


Spread of Islam on this network!

Swahili city states grew. 



Trans saharan network:

Connected North Africa and mediterranean with interior of west Africa
Innovation in transportation tech helped this grow

Arabian Camel
Camel saddle : )

Further increase of inter-regional trade -> expanded geographical trade of existing routes (show all the routes increasing year by year)

Big Idea #2:

A major effect of the growth of the trading routes was cultural diffusion.
Trading ideas -> show all the things that spread everywhere whether to Japan yk everywhere! Trade networks cultural diffusion expands previous example w budhism and shit

Big Idea #3:
Increasing interconnection facilitated by trading routes led to significant environment consequences

Bananas from South East Asia introduced to Africa bc of Indian Ocean trade. Disease spread Black Death idrk

Big idea #4:

The mongols created the largest land based empire in history, which facilitated further interconnection and interaction across Afro-Eurasia. 

Made full Silk Road safe : )

Persian / Chinese courts work together across long distances bc of Mongols system in which such exchanges could easily occur

Mongol send skill ppl to areas to spread idea / knowledge. Made better astronomy stuff improve astrolabe.  

Have each big idea be an event. For each kingdom in big idea say how they consolidated power, how they came to be, any continuity and change, anything they traded. Plus cool structures and things show on map yk like ziggurats and shit or gold mines. And like three field system

Unit 3 Land Based empires: 

Big Idea #1: various land based empires developed and expanded through 1450-1750 most significantly thru th use of gunpowder ; )Ottoman Empire adopts gunpowder weapons from Mongol releasing them on Silk Road
South western Europe / Anatolia under there country

They sacked Constantinople and named it Istanbul fierce gunpowder military

Janisarries the Christian boys they enslaved converted to Islam

Then the Safavids. Shah Ismail. Shi’ite dynasty at odd with Mughal, Ottoman who were Sunni. Shah Abbas built up Safavid military. Safavid cavalry didn’t want to shoot guns from horses he also got Christians from conquered regions

Mughal empire;
Another gunpowder empire south/Central Asia
Babur established by displacing the Dehli Sultanate!
Akbar made it more tolerant Mughal rule covered half Indian subcontinent. 

Manchu empire / Qing dynasty is another empire new Chinese empire ming after mongol rule going down. Ming dynasty weakened lol Manchu ppl of north raid china. For all the raiding ppl show the map shifting and stuff around!

Most of Chinese ethnically Han Qing rulers Manchu so they use the Mandate of Heaven to legitimize rule

Safavid / Mughal conflict in Middle East : ) -> show the other conflict ones
Give a summary of difference between Shia / sunni

Big Idea #2:
Rulers of land based empires gained power and maintained control by establishing bureaucracies, sponsoring the creation of art, centralizing tax collection, and developing large militaries. 

Ottoman used Devshirme -> get into this to staff imperial bureaucracy 
Developed military professional 


Tokugawa shogunate samurai put in government payroll

States legitimized / consolidated thru religious ideas
In Europe 
European kings claimed to rule by divine right of kings
King / queen god representative on earth -> louie the 14th of France English kings louie 14th palace of versailles to consolidate rule : )

Over in americas aztec human sacrifice, Inca sun temple of Cuzco to facilitate festivals of worship.

Over I China emperor qangshi or whatever used portrait of himself with Confucian books in back.

Tax collection systems:

Zamindar in Mughal -> Mughal leaders muslim rule of hindu population t consolidate power tax collection system carried out by Zamindar -> elite land owners granted authority over peasants.

Ottoman tax farming -> auctioned!

Big idea #3:
Belief systems could play different roles in and among land based empires in some cases shared beliefs bound ppl together, in other cases conflicting beliefs caused conflict. 

Christianity in 16th century protestant reformation
Martin Luther 95 thesis
Corruption of Catholic Church exposed. Major plot in Christian church. Protestant and catholics!
Printing press helped it spread

Sunni / Shia split intensified Mughal/ Safavid/ Ottoman stuff

Interaction of belief systems syncretism produced new stuff:
Sikhism in South Asia -> continuity / change syncretic blend of hindu / islamic doctrines. In terms of change resulting faith it entirely different!


Unit 4 transoceanic interconnections:

Big idea #1:
New and updated maritime tech facilitated transoceanic trad eand the development of sea-based empires


Europeans borrowed from classical islamic / asian societies with astrolabe, how far north /south ship from equator, magnetic compass, lateen sail -> say which country each thing from!

Europeans made better ships portuguese / dutch.
Portuguese made caravel smaller and faster square + lateen sail -> to. Carry lots of cargo -> show which trade routes the thing is used on
Dutch Flaute -> metric buttload of cargo space Dutch VOC -> East India company dominate Indian Ocean trade

Big idea #2:
European state sponsored exploration led to a raid expansion of trade and transatlantic contact with the americas. 

Wealth building : )
Having access to lucrative Indian Ocean trade European states wanted to be able to trade on their own terms. Muslim controlled the routes at the time. European states started sailing. 

Wanted to spread religion ( christianity). Tied tightly to political structure 
Universalizing religion -> wanted to spread missionaries!
Spreading power of state! Huh

Competition with other states mercantilism -> dominant economic system finite amount f wealth in world empire building = get limited piece of pie so no one can get behind!

Portuguese were the first movers in sea based empires! -> trading post empires! Sailing around Africa making small strategically located trading posts and ultimately throughout Indian Ocean. They didn’t establish traditionally colonies. They wanted monopoly over spice trade

Then came Spain. Spain monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella sponsor Christopher Columbus. Trying to find sea route to Asia. Spanish sailed west different than Portuguese and they were far more interested in conquering ppl / land new Spain across ocean. 

English French the dutch sponsored explorers to find sea route to Asia : )

Big idea#3:

Columbia exchange was the transfer of animal plant food disease from Europe to American and vice versa. As a result of new contact europeans sought to colonize the americas

Things exchanged:

Maize America to Europe potato

Europe to America, wheat and rice

Enslaved africans brought okra and rice

Effect was as afro eurasian pops expanded their diets the afro eurasian populations grow increased lifespan healthier

Lead to more tech development, wealth, etc.

Animals turkeys llamas americas to Europe
Cattle pig horses Europe to americas

Significant transfer that occurred  was diseases
Europe to americas smallpox, measles
America to Europe syphillis

More downside on side of America more benefit in European states

Big idea #4: -> need to go off on your own to show the different labor systems!
With transoceanic contact established, European states established empires fueled by mercantilist economic policy and coerced labor systems. A state wants more exports than imports. Wants gold! 

This one is important!

Show all the policies and hsit. As Portuguese got trading post empire across Africa. Some africans saw as intruders. Other grew. Asante empire! There were new maritime empires that were arising British! The British went out seeking trade routes. In India British made various trading posts under authority of British east India company. Took advantage of growing tension between muslim and hindus. 

Spain encountered aztec / Inca empires fell bc of disease ravaged. 

Conflicts between states over colonial claims in new world. Spain signs a treaty w Portuguese. Ready of tordeceadas divide up America between both powers : )

Spanish empire began there conquest by plundering America for gold and silver! Actual wealth in agriculture! -. labor systems to exploit this resource. Coerced labor system encomienda system. Spanish compelled indigenous ppl to work planataiotns. Later replaced by hacienda system. Low wages debts remain high. Go over differences between both! Mit’a system go over all of them

Everything gets back to mercantilism! Colonies established for enrichment of homeland! Bring enslaved Africa laborers over. Indigenous populations dying off bc of diseases. More money equals more need for enslaved. 

Big idea #5:

The development of maritime empires over time significantly changed the economies and societies in which they were established!

The rise of joint stock companies! -> dutch, English, French, british east India compnyay, dutch east India company. Allowed continued exploration / colonization with limited risk to investors. At leas tin beginning influence facilitated maritime colonization. 

Triangle trade! - one small part of Atlantic system of trade. Changed Africa, manufactured good to Europe to west Africa enslaved ppl transported to americas, sugar molasses transported back to Europe : )

As Atlantic trade routes connecting new societies these societies r changing. With religion as religion spread thru new territories syncretism and conflict.t indigenous with christianity in americas. 
 Conflict is sunni shia divide

Big idea #6:

As states imposed their cultural, political, and economic will on various colonized and enslaved ppl resitstance occurred. 

Maratha rebellion Mughal emperor’s muslim ppl hindu rebelled against what they saw as invasion of their own beliefs. Brought Mughal empire to end and replaced with Maratha

Pueblo revolt in Spanish colonies of North America pueblo and apache americanízalos Indians killed hundreds of Spaniards and burned there churches1 lets go

Rebellion of enslaved africans stone rebellion
Show the dancing example

Big idea #7:
Social categories, roles and practices were both maintained and underwent significant change during this period

Qing dynasty: retained Chinese institutions, civil service exam, buereacry 
Also had restrictive policies against the indigenous ppl!

Spanish casta system is change in the new world. Entirely new social hierarchy Spanish imposed on americas organized on ancestry and race. Top spaniards. Bottom African and indigenous Americans!

Unit #5 Revolutions:

Big idea #1;
New ways of thinking embodied in the englihgtnment created the occasion for reform and revolution.

European ideas that go from belief -> imperical data and observation
Enlightenment beliefs: natural rights John Locke. Social contract. Jean jacque crusou.

In rejecting traditional system enlightenment put the center of authority in person themselves

Led to women suffrage. Seneca falls convention equal rights for women especially right to vote

Big movement for abolitionism. Slave trade banned in many states across world. 

Russia abolished serfdom! 

Big idea #2: the idea of the englightnemtn combined with rising nationalism, led to various revolution throughout the world. American revolution (Declaration of Independence! Growing sense ofntionalism of British colonies due to represssive British policies such as taxation. Formed on the principles of enlgifment though. Life liberty pursuit of property. -> French Revolution (inspired by American rev) -> Haitian revolution  (French colony) -. Latin American revolution

Documents that come out of thing exhibit enlightnemtn though

Declaration of the rights of man and citizen in France
Simon Bolivar letter from Jaimaica!!!! -> get into this!
Led to resistance movement and revolutions


Big idea #3: The Industrial Revolution began in Britain and would eventually transform the world! 


No longer by hand now by machine. Mass production!
Industrial rev began in Great Britain bc of proximity to waterways -> rivers canals criss crossing

Significant concentration of coal, iron, got timber from americas!
Urbanization -. more ppl moving to cities with factories located enclosure movement send poorer element of society to urban areas.
Improved agiculautal productivity. Seed drill, field rotation
Led to innovations, factory system. Initially powered by water then after time powered by steam engines! Big money maker is textiles! Clothing. As a result shift from artisan labor to unskilled labor!


Big idea #4;

As western industrialization spread, middle eastern and asian countries share in global manufacturing declined

As it spread all over different factors helped adopt / adapt to industrialization

Us get massive immigration to urban centers
Over in Russia constructions of trans Siberian railroad. Distance parts of empire connected

In Japan they embrace industrialization as a defense to westernization Meiji reformation!

As they are claiming a larger and larger portion of global manufacturing other more traditional places declining. Textiles in India now all over to Britain! British put taxes on Indian textiles.

Big idea #5:
The advent of new technologies fundamentally changed the landscape of manufacturing.

 First industrial rev all abt textiles -> powered by steam engine ran by coal

Second industrial rev al abt building materials like steel -> powered by oil. Internal combustion engine! Fossil fuel revolution. Greatly increased overall the amount of energy available to humans. Railroads so gosh darn important!!!!!!! Transfer stuff! -> transcontinental railroads. Show all the shit on the map show factories housing let us zoom in more se different stuff simulate a full world!!!!! Throughout everywhere show everything!!!! So much work.

National market for good! Transsiberian railroad same effect in Russia. Telegraph communication technology. Also helped facilitate trade.

Big idea #6: significant economic shifts occurred during this period including the rise of free market capitalism, transnational businesses, and increased standards of living. 

Began to abandon mercantilism in favor or Adam Smiths capitalism 
In a book called the wealth of nations. Principal of govn removing al linflucne of itself from economy. Thru forces of supply demand and invidislb hand of market!

States rising to power at this point more and more adopt free market economics

Rise of transnational corporations. Operate across national boundaries. Unileaver corporation. British / dutch company. 

More goods, more mass production, nicer things for middle class!!!!! It growing


Big idea #7:

As industrialization spread, it created the occasion for some states to enact reforms!

For all the blessings it had for powerful ppl who led those states it led to some difficulties for lower classes including bad working conditions in factories and shit. Now there was labor unions! Bargain collectively. Labor unions won minimum wage laws, shorter work days, five day work weeks : )

Another reform introduced as a result of spread of free market capitalism was rise of Marxism! He laid out in communist manifesto. proliteriate -> working class and bourgeois -> middle upper class. His solution solialism that led to communism. He said all capitalism will fail. 

Tanzimat reforms in Ottoman Empire! Made to industrial Ottoman Empire (a little late lmao) goal to eliminate corruption from government. Response to encroaching power/ influence of west! -> not nearly as successful as Japan with similar motivation.



Unit 6 Consequences of industriazliation:

Big Idea #1: 
Various ideologies contributed to the growing development of imperialism in the period 1750-1900

New wave of empire building by europeans
They needed resources
Civilizing mission!
Nationalism.

Cultural ideologies -> belief in superiority of white race. Wester culture. White mans burden rudder Kiplings poem
Social darwinism -> strong eating weak in nature is biological. Social darwinism is those same principles to social and political realities. Industrialized nations saw themselves as best adapted to world around them! 
Desire to spread Christianity

Growing desire for powerful states to declare themselves great on world stage -> nationalism. Build bigger empires. Britain taking over India, France taking over African colonies. Japan modernized there military and industrialized in Meiji restoration. Began colonizing Korea after beating china in __ war. The main players were europeans but Japan thrown!


Economic motives: 
2nd Industrial Revolution
Wanted more colonies for new markets and access to more raw materials. Lead them to go out and get stuf fin south east Asia and Africa

Big Idea #2:
Imperial states employed different means of consolidation power in their empires and expanding their empires

One of the means was non-state to state control of colonies. The Congo is an example! Began as private colony owned by Belgian king king Leopold the 2nd. His brutal policies exposed this was international pressure to transfer to Belgian state
India is another example. Controlled by British east India company increasing corruptions led to the Sepoy rebellion (India mutiny) and then British govn took direct control of colony in India

New imperial powers are now replacing the old imperial powers!
Portuguese and Spanish go to losing power and then like getting replaced by the US! Spanish American war us expanded into Philippines which was previously a Spanish colony!

Japan expanded into parts of china, south east asia, some pacific island
Talk about where Manchuria was somewhere

Russia tzars go to Poland and parts of Middle East and into china. Old imperial powers replaced by new players! 

Scramble for Africa!!!!! Africa highly desirable in eyes of European imperial powers bc of lots of raw materials! European imperial powers start carving up Africa but the result was ottoman Bismarck called Berlin conference where they peacefully carved up Africa among themselves. No input from africans themselves!

Big idea #3:
The new wave of imperialism during this period led to new waves of resistance amount colonized ppl

First method was direct resistance! Peru! Indigenous leader named Tupac Amaru was tired of the Spanish atrocities and he led a rebellion against Spanish authorities. 

Also direct resistance in India. Sepoy mutiny. 

Second method was creating of new states. Best example creation of new balkan states. Under control of ottomans for a long time. A wave of nationalism began sweeping thru these different groups. Inspired them to fight for their independence. Greece , serbia, Bulgaria!

Reglously inspired rebellions:

Ghost dance movement in US! Western expansion indigenous Americans began believing in prophecy that if they performed this ritual dance they would awaken ancestral dead and help them fight. Show a cool animation of this! Of ghosts dancing maybe.

Cosa Cattle Killing movement in South Africa. 

Big idea #4:
The growing need for imperial powers to extract raw materials and increase the food supply transformed the global economy. 

Many ppl were sort of transitioning from subsistence farmers to cash crop farmers. Growing what u need to survive to export based. Coffee, rubber, sugar (show these locations on map of these things and the paths they’re going to)
Uruguay Argentina cattle ranching became huge business!
Peru and Chile began to specialize in production of guano bird poop -> incredible fertilizer. made more cash crop export economies!

Colonial economies were transformed to increasingly serve need of urban centers not needs of colonial ppl themselves

Big idea #5: industrialized states and businesses within those states practiced economic imperialism primality in Asia and Latin America. 

Situation where one country has significant power over another country! Economic influence forcing the weaker party to serve greater power economy needs.

India Britain good one
Britain china opium wars. Trade decifict between china Britain. Britain decide to fix this by smuggling tons of opium drug into china! Trad edeficit solves lmao

Chinese leaders didn’t like ppl getting hooked on drugs
Banned opium then destroyed British opium shipments
They retaliated made opiumw wars bc of superior industrial capacity -> British forced china for free trade agreement and open several trading ports -> talk abt the treaty. 

China carve dup into spheres of influence. Britain could do it France Germany Russia us wanted a piece!!!! Exclusive trading rights with china in their particular spherere

Always wanted to shape the part they imperialism
US invested in Mexico Cuba infrastructure
Britain dominated cotton growth in India Egypt

Big idea #6:
Various environment and economic factors contributed to patterns of migration between 1750 and 1900

As a result of industrialization. And globalization. Massive migration began to occur during this period. Moved for work. Slavery kinda fiddling out at this point. Replaced by indentured servitude. Created ethnic enclaves and cultural diffusion

Asian contract laborers. Britain abolished slave trade. Brought in Chinese India workers who would work for extremely low wages

Penal colonies like Jail. Australia. British sent there convicts there for hard labor! 

Bad conditions at home like India lots of poverty. Maritious offer indentured servitude for British. 

They were received with discrimination in many of these new countries. Flat out racist legislation. White Australia policy. Chinese exclusion act in US. 


Unit 7 Global Conflict:
Big Idea #1; Internal and external factors contribute to significant change in various states across the world after 1900 -> states were changing

Russian revolution -> Russia lagging behind west economic growth. Reluctant to expand civil liberties. Loss of crimean war. Loss of Russo-japanese war. Bolsheviks seized power. Established communist government. Remade Russia into Soviet Union

Another example is the Qing dynasty in China! There was lots of ethnic tension in China under Qing rulers. Lots of rival ethnic groups. Constant danger of famine! Government was receiving diminished revenue. Externally there were threats from encroaching wester industrialization/ imperial powers. Last Chinese dynasty overthrown by Sun yat sin. Talk abt boxer and taiping rebellions.

In Americas state undergo change Mexican revolution. Massive wealth gap. Especially with regards to land. Long term cooperation with us investors via the state which was often bad to the poor. Revolution led by Francisco medero to solve problems.

Big idea #2: WW1 was caused by a combination of MAIN militarism, alliance, imperialism, and nationalism!

Militarism: massive build up of military weaponry thx to industrialization! Guns sitting around want to itch! Militaries themselves build up. 

Alliance system: defensive grouping of nations stacked against one another! they promised each other if one was attacked come to another name. Talk about the names of alliances in particular

Imperialism: Fierce competition to lay claim to remaining colonial lands no one has planted flag in. Competition is fueling conflict between the powers. Weaponry, munitions, building up, already kinda fighting

Nationalism: Intense feelings of pride in ones national identity. Wanted to prove they were good on world stage. 

Also talk about Archduke Franz Ferdinand at end!

Big Idea #3; governments used a variety of strategies to fight WW1 including propaganda to mobilize their home fronts and new weapons technology in the battlefield 

WW1 was a total war!
Each country fighting had to leverage all their domestic assets to fight home and abroad. 

Propoganda used -> messaging imagery (show some of it)
Bias, inaccurate, meant to strike fear!

New technologies used in war the deadliest war in World history: poison gas, machine guns, submarines, tanks, with trench warfare -> not first time but it was first time it ensured long lasting stalemates (industrialization = keep pumping out stuff). Enormous casualties!

War ends with signing of treating of versailles!!!!!!!!

Big idea #4: Following WW1 governments began to take a more prominent role in their nation’s economiesStarting gin the US: 1929 Great Depression begins in US. Spread to rest of world. Herbert Hoover president at time and by his reckoning though market would correct itself if they wait it out. Then the democrat FDR Franklin Delano Roosevelt came out with New Deal massive government spending. Complicated whether it worked or not. As a result of Great Depression US government got heavily involved. 

German economy ruined after war. As a result they plunged into hyperinflation! Their money was worthless. Bc of unfavorable peace terms in treaty of Versailles. Leads to rise of fascism!!!! And Nazi party -> which championed strong government intervention in nGerman economy to get them out of this mess. Cease reparation payments and go crazy on military spending to build up their forces! 

Third example Soviet Union! -> created a series of five year plans Joseph Stalin -> transform it into industrial power rapidly. Kinda a disaster. Collectivization of agriculture. It served the needs of urban industrial centers. Which was where the emphasis / focus of five year plans was. Sending all food forcibly into urban centers = widespread death / amine in urban areas (especially Ukraine) 

Big idea #5: WW2 was caused by the unsustainable peace agreement of WW1, economic criss, and the rise of fasciest regimes, most notably, Nazi Germany

War guilt clause! -> Britain / France very concerned that treaty itself blamed Germany. Eneorumous amount of German national shame. 

Mandate for reparations made to pay for entirety of victorious powers rebuilding. 

Great Depression hits. Hyper inflation. 

Then rise of nazis in Germany -> extreme nationlism! Wanted to restore German greatness on world stage. They canceled reparation. Hitler begins taking land around germany. 

Britain looking at this like u can’t do that but not rly doing much. 
Hitler lying then he keeps taking. Policy known as appeasement. Didn’t want to oppose hitler. Red line was once hitler invades Poland!

Big idea #6: WW2 was another total war, and totalitarian and democratic nations deployed all their nations resources to fight and win

Propoganda, manufacturing sectors repurposed for military output, colonial men called to fight in war

Totalitarian states used different methods to mobilize then democratic states.

US (democratic state) had strongest industrial center. Not in danger of destruction bc of Atlantic Ocean! -> they produced an astounding amount of munitions for war effort! Men going off to war brought women in to work factories! 

Germans mobilized not by citizens they relied on forced labor like in concentration camps! -> counter productive. Conditions were so harsh that productivity suffered greatly. 

Also in order to fight these wars there was a repression of civil liberties. Democarcaries curtailed freedom of speech .;US gathered up Japanese Americans migrants / citizens and forcibly put them in internment camps!

There was new military tactics / techonlogy: 
Fire bombing of Tokyo and Dresden -> using incideary bombs that are used to blow stuff up and set fires as well!
New technology: atom bomb! 

Big Idea #7: the rise of extremist groups led to the attempted destruction of certain populations through genocide or ethnic violence. 

Nazi holocaust -> ideology known as final solution
Subject to forced removal from population to ghettos to concentration camps. 

Other ethnic violence. Ukrainian farmland rly productive for soviet union. Relied heavily on Ukrainian exports -> they were part of Soviet Union. Farmers in Ukraine resented Stalins collectivization of agriculture. There food confiscated. Left entirely not enough food for farmers themselves. In order to resist this the farms actually burned their crops ad killed their livestock. Created a massive famine and 7 - 10 million peasants died as a result. His response was to send crops grown elsewhere to send to urban workers! 

Unit 8 Cold War and decolonization:

Big idea #1: The Cold War was a decades long ideological struggle between the US and the Soviet Union that shaped to a signiciatn degree the geopolitical sin the second half of the 20th century

Tensions occurring before WW2 was over. Open hostility! Conflicting ideologies. Democratic capitalism. Soviet Union authoritarian and communist. 

Mutual mistrust between these two powers. Disagreement over the post WW2 world. Stalin claimed Eastern Europe refused democratic elections like they agreed to between uUs Britain and Soviet Union.

Disagreements over Germany. Germany itself split into 4 occupation zones. Berlin split into 4 occupation zones. Soviets put up Berlin Wall to serape there side form western side. Soviets wanted to keep Germany weak. Western powers wanted to keep Germany strong -> no more WW!

Ideological battle sort of defines geopolitics for next 40 years. also during this time decolonization creates brand new states across world that can be influence by US or USSR. And there is nonaligned. Show all the states on bot sides on the map. Talk about decolonization between the previous imperial power now weak from WW2

Non-aligned movement Indonesian president Akbar Bukhara or whatever his name was. African former colonies or currently resisting decided to join together to not be taken over by being pulled into new orbit of one of these great powers which they just escaped!


Big idea #2: the major effects of the Cold War included an arms race, new military alliances, and proxy wars across the globe!

Both powers spent so much money building stockpiles of nukes and weapons
Reality led to more tension

Warsaw pact and NATO 

Cold War created an endless amount of proxy wars. US and USSR getting busy building massive amounts of weapons. If they ended up shooting at each other MAD. They still wanted to fight! They did proxy wars. Proxy war in Asia: Korean or Vietnam war! -> new countries that were formally colonies split between communist and anti-communist forces. Us comes to back anti communist soviet back communist! -> get to fight but don’t fight each other directly!
Proxy war in LAtin America: Proxy war in Nicauragua. Group of social revolutionaries -> sandaristas overthrew nicauragauan dictator. Communist Cuba and soviets. US invested in Contras to oust the communists. -> remeber this!!!!!!
Proxy war in Africa: Angolan civil war. US and its allies supported the anti communist soviet supported communist. Became a much longer deadlier war. Commies won this one.

Big idea #3: during this period, some states adopted communism, but none more significant than china!

Lots of grievances in china over their dependence on western powers after economic imperialism and being forced to sign unequal treaties. Revolution in 1911 which established china as a republic. On and off again civil war is Mao Zedong communist forces with USSR defeat nationalist party and china becomes communist state. Different flavor of communism that the one in the Soviet Union

Mao Zedong implement the collectivization of agriculture but here it was a relatively peaceful / bloodless process bc the peasant support from revolution -> explain this

Also was the desire for the state to control economy. Great Leap Forward. Economic plan to rapidly industrialize china in rural areas thru heavy industry -> kinda poor quality in rural areas. Bad harvest = starvation of millions on millions of ppl!!!!

In Africa you have Egypt -> British French complete work on Suez Canal 1869. Extremely strategic route to sea based trade in Indian Ocean. Egyptian leader Gamal Abdul nasa. Nationalized Egypt and brought the canal under control of Egypt! Britain France and Israeli forces invade Egypt in retaliation. Soviet union backed this. Eisenhower tells them to withdraw! 

Big idea #4: the process of decolonization essentially occurred in one of two ways: negotiated independence or armed conflict! -> show the violent vs non violent things here side by side

Indian national congress in 1885. Petition Britain for greater degree of self rule! Britain largely ignored these petitions. Gandhi led nonviolent -> impactful but didn’t lead to independence before WW2 but after WW2 Britain so broke from war that they officially recognized india independence 

Lot of violence in independence of India bc of Britain plan to parititon India into India and Pakistan for hindu and muslim. Lots of violence and death as moving!

Decolonization thru armed resistance: Algeria in Africa. French colony. After WW2 Algerians began to feel this wave of nationalism and they wanted independec.e French citizens didn’t want this! Algerian muslims formed national liberation front and went violently against French! French responded brutally. New French president declared end to war and gave Algeria independence

Big idea #5: the redrawing of political boundaries during decolonization led to conflict and population displacement. 

Like the India Pakistan one!
Before WW1 Palestine was part of Ottoman Empire. Majority Muslim population. Ottomans on losing side of war. Palestine given to Britain under mandate system. Late 19th century zionoism growing among jews scattered around Europe was to have state of their own in Palestine. Increasingly large wave of jews go to Palestine. Arab resisted! 

Big Idea #6: In newly independent states, governments often took a strong role in guiding economic life in order to promote their own growth and development. 

Gamal abdul nasar -> Egyptian president leader of Egypt. Nasar. Nationalized Suez Canal. Gained soviet support trend conflict. Nasar asserts strong state power economically

Indirah Gandhi in india adoption of green revolution

Big idea #7: Movements to resist oppressive power structures multiplied in this period. See were characterized by non-violence, others by violence

Mahandas Gandhi: homespun movement (protest of Britain economic dominance of cotton industry! stopped profits of produce) -> he encouraged followers to make clothing at home

Gandhi and followers to stop salt tax.: ) -. walked several hundred miles to get there own salt ! -> show the distance of walk! 

Martin Luther king jr. he took the tactics of civil disobedience to protest America racial segregation laws!!!!! -> Montgomery bus boycott! Black citizens of Alabama refused to ride public transportation!  Ultimately the civil rights movements outlawed racial discribmaition in schools. Then congress passed several anti-dsicmaitnon laws

Nelson Mandela. Ended South African apartheid. blakc africans denied basic rights. Nelson Mandela and he led black South Africans and strikes / boycotts he eventually changed idea of tactics. Nonviolence and enforced other methods as well. Jailed for 2 decades. Upon release 1994 he ran for president and won office!!!!!

Big idea #8: the Cold War ended bc of US military development the Soviet Union failed invasion of Afghanistan and the reform policies of Mihail Gorbachev

Ronald Reagan led into massive spending! To win Cold War

Soviets tried to match spending but bc of failed Afghanistan invasion led them into deeper hole

1979 soviet troops invade Afghanistan to prop up communist regime against Afghan muslim groups. The rebels were supplied by the US, Pakistan, Saudis. The soviets losing that war further depresses their economy!

Gorbachev 1985 his vision was to reform the repressive side of communist with Parastrokai restructuring of economy to help boost it by reducing the level of central planning! Introduced glashknost openness : ) -> show Stalin stuff freedom speech bolstered!  He also announced that the Soviet Union wouldn’t use military intervention to prop up communist states. States in soviet bloc wanted independence. Soviet legislature decided to dissolve Soviet Union!

Unit 9 Globalization:

Big Idea #1: New technologies increased the speed of globalization and had widespread effects on the global population in the 20th and 21st centuries. 

Communication tech: radio, cellphones, internet, effect is that ppl increasingly come into contact with ideas outside their culture. Leads to globalization of cultures

Transportation: air travel. Facilitated migration, further economic connections across globe, business began using for shipping goods, shipping containers!!!!!! So damn important!!!!! Point of shipping containers increased the amount of goods that can ship internationally = increase of global commerce

New energy: petroleum nuclear power = increasing productivity and goods manufactured

Medical innovations: birth control, women increasing control over whether or when to have babies, declining birth rate in western countries. Italy Japan Germany birthrates now declining. Also vaccines!!!! In wealthier developed nations like Polio, measles!

Advances in agriculture: green revolution! -> through controlled cross breeding scientists create new strands of wheat and grain to have more abundant harvests! Much of the green revolution occurred in these developing nations

Big idea #2: New and old diseases continued to pose a threat in the age of globalization

Disesases associated with poverty: malaria, tuberculosis, cholera ->. Vaccines for all of them 
Disease used to affect everyone equally. Although they could move out of city, ultimately it affected everyone. 
Ancient diseases now spread among populations we have what we need to cure it but we don’t

Then, as a result of globalization new diseases that lead to pandemics: ebola, aids, Spanish flu 1918, as they spread they have serious demographic consequences. Spanish flu = lots of social disruption + economic slowdown. They create the occasion for tech / medical advances (covid MNRA vaccine!)

Diseases associated with old age -> heart disease, Alzheimers

Interesting division of how disease works in the world

Big idea #3: globalization has created some significant environmental problems with various attempted solutions

Give real example for these : )

Deforestation! 

desertification. Fertile land that previously grew crops and made food available not like all dried up

Decline in air quality. Indutrialziatio = air quality polluiotnl great smog in London in 1950’s Fog + coal emissions = whole days of toxic air!

Increasing consumption of fresh water -> way more water needed for farming to feed global population. 2nd many impoverished nation = not clean access to drinking water!

Increasing global temperature climate change! Carbon emission increase global temperature. Kyoto Protocol 1997, Paris agreement, member nation agreed to limit carbon emissions

Big idea #4: both the nature and scope of the globalized economy have changed significantly since 1900. 

Proliferation of free market economics. US under Ronald Reagan. Great Britain under Margaret thatcher. Deregulation of business and tax cuts. 

Another big economic change was the rise of knowledge economies. Wealthier countries mainly western had workers not manufacture / work more like facilitate the making of things! While that’s happening less developed countries become the manufacturing hubs of world like Vietnam and Mexico. 

Rise of multi national corporations: business incorporated in. One country but does business in many countries around world. Employ knowledge workers in their own countries. Manufacture good in poorer countries. Distribute around world. -> use Nestley chocolate!

Rise of regional and global free trade agreement! Agreement between countries / regions to reduce barriers to trade such as tariffs! -> NAFTA between Canda, US, and Mexico, Association of Southeast asian nations into a mutually independent economic unit!

Since 1900, increasing globalization has led to calls for reform in terms of human rights and economic inequality

Global dialogue abt ills of humanity. Global movement to address! Movements to address racial inequalitys. 

Apartheid in South Africa, led by nelson Mandela.

Civil rights moment in response to Jim Crow regulations!

Class reform!! -> In India Caste system. Lower members put down. Caste reservation system certain amount of jobs kept for those lower members

Global reform movements for gender inequality. 1975 United Nations had first world conference for women. They drafted a declaration of right for women. Right of women to vote! 

Big idea #6: after 1900, culture became increasingly globalized! 

Jamaican Reggae -> Bob Marley
KPOP -> BTS
Hollywood and Bollywood! -> influence of American values in places never influenced by those values. Ingested thru American films!  -> give an example

Spread of consumer culture! -> crossing international borders. Result of online commerce, amazon, Alibaba, ppl can buy consumer goods from any other place in world -> thx to shipping containers

Rise of global brands -> CocaCola, Mcdonalds, KFC

Big Idea #7: Despite all the benefits of globalization there have also been significant resistance movements against its effects 

Most benefits of globalization has bene experienced in global north -> developed nations

Global south has experienced globalization as a threat -> resistance movements sprung up such as the WTO got massive 1999 protest called the Battle for Seattle . Other protests against International Monetary Fund. Showing they were favoring richer nations and actually fostered inequality. 

Big Idea #8: globalization has changed the ways nations and states interact across the world

Formation of the United Nations. Formed after WW2 to maintain world peace! Foster international cooperation! Security council, international court of justice, universal declaration of human rights. Recognizes that all human beings have inherent rights! Regardless of what is recognized by there individual states! Right to life, gender equality, right to not be ensalved, protection of refugees! UN reflect needs of increasingly globalized world!









Do formating thing on site!!!! For Saq dbq show the formatting : ) add in a feature so you can mark at start what you don’t remember out of all the big ideas and it will go slide by slide helping you study those!!!! Show every single region / country on map at all times! Make color coating stay relatively sam tin region throughout.  Also in the SAQ section show some very common SAQ and DBQ prompts from college board and then like show Venn diagrams to show different stuff on how to answer them : ) yk. And no user writing it themselves. Show these saqs on our big idea stuff



