Feeling a little bit like AP World is pushing you around like this? Well, this video is an attempt to look at two final regions in Africa, both East Africa and South Africa from the beginning of the course all the way to the end to help you connect the dots. Now, let's take a quick peek at the College Board map. Notice that East Africa includes the coast along the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea near the Arabian Peninsula. The region of Southern Africa is where modern-day South Africa is, but also includes basically all the countries south of the Democratic Republic of Congo, including countries like Zimbabwe and Mozambique and Zambia. Now, we pick up the course in the year 1200, the era of state building and the expanding trade networks. And we've discussed how in many places things are very decentralized around the idea of really these kinship-based tides. However, there is one major state in Southern Africa that you should know about, and that is Great Zimbabwe. It was built by the Shona people, the largest ethnic group in modern-day Zimbabwe. This is a story you probably learned about this year, where you kind of heard this story where Europeans came to the region and they couldn't believe that such an advanced civilization existed, so they assumed oh, Europeans must have been here before we were. But, no. Historians and archaeologists confirmed it was definitely African. Great Zimbabwe focused on cattle raising and involved mining, mostly like gold and iron, and they were connected to the other city-states along the Swahili coast who traded in the Indian Ocean. Now, in Eastern Africa, you would find the growing state of Aksum, which is today known as Ethiopia. Christianity spread to this region from the Mediterranean and into Egypt and then into Ethiopia. You'll see how leaders here legitimized their rule through monumental architecture and religion as they built some pretty iconic churches. Now, this time period is also about the rise of our existing trade networks like the Indian Ocean. The Swahili city-states around the East Coast of Africa and more of those inland states like Great Zimbabwe were connected to the Arabian Peninsula, to India, to Southeast Asian states like Srivijaya and Majapahit, and the Song Dynasty in China as merchants traded in the Indian Ocean. Maritime trade allowed it for a larger quantity, physically, of goods as well as just efficiency of moving that. Early trading in the Indian Ocean network relied highly upon the understanding of the monsoon winds until the arrival of lateen sails and new technologies that let them kind of sail against them. Now, this will lead us to new powerful trading cities that emerged in the East Coast of Africa like Kilwa, Mozambique, Mogadishu, which were coastal cities that exported items to the interior of Africa and back again to the Indian Ocean. African goods like iron and ivory and animal skins were exchanged from Africa into the Indian Ocean network, but religion also traded from the roots and brought Islam into parts of East Africa. Areas like Ethiopia continued to have a sizable Christian population. Plus, new crops made their way to Africa from Indonesia like bananas. B A N A N A S. Thank you, Gwen Stefani. Which let's just be honest. Do you guys even know who she is? Like Hollaback Girl is like the jam, and I'm guessing it's not yours. But, bananas are good source of vitamins and antioxidants and all to say more food, especially healthy food, more people. Now, this will shift us into the next historical period of our course, the years of 1450 to 1750, the era of large land-based empires and these new maritime empires. And to be honest, it is not going to be overly active here with the development of large land-based empires in South and East Africa. We will see that the Ottoman Empire will expand along the Red Sea and include some of the lands in Eastern Africa. But, the larger impact will really come um as we see the maritime empires trying to bypass those Islamic empires and landing themselves in Africa. Remember, the Portuguese are early leaders as they try to get to the Indian Ocean for all the spices. They sponsored Bartholomew Diaz, who will get to the tip the tippy tip of South Africa known as the Cape of Good Hope. They will sponsor Vasco da Gama, who will round the Cape and make it all the way to India. But, the Netherlands also established maritime empires and were sailing to the Indian Ocean, which led them to pitstop once again in some of our areas of Southern Africa and Eastern Africa along the way. Obviously, most famously, we have the Cape Colony in South Africa. Now, the Dutch East India Company was chartered by the monarch in the Netherlands as a joint stock company. Now, slavery in Africa continued in its traditional forms, including incorporation of slaves into households and the export of slaves to different regions like the Indian Ocean. But, as more interaction occurred with Europeans, the use of slave labor morphed into what we will see in the Atlantic slave trade and again, the exportation and trafficking of Africans to the New World. While we often think of the Columbian Exchange as goods brought to the Americas or to Europe, let's remember it also include African foods like okra and rice being brought to the Americas and American crops being brought to Africa. Populations in Africa benefited from the nutritional goods that they found in the Americas in their food crops like the potato and the tomato. And I'm sure the avocado because they're delightful. For all you avocado haters out there, it is just unfortunate that you are missing out on the goodness of the avocado. Now, let's see what happens as we shift into our next time period of 1750 to 1900, the age of industry and imperialism. As the Industrial Revolution is catching steam, European nations were seeking those raw materials. Remember, Africa is resource-rich. I've said it before. However, their geographic blessing has turned into much of a curse as imperialists wanted all those resources. In Southern Africa, we'll see the desire for the mineral wealth like gold and iron and diamonds. East Africa is a source of timber, which will lead to vast deforestation. And as I've said before, all of this resource grabbing was solidified at the Berlin Conference of 1885, where European countries would claim colonial lands in Africa and try to avoid a war between European nations over these lands. And it made the region look like this. Notice that the Portuguese, who are quite active in the Indian Ocean, have some larger colonies in these regions as seen in purple. Britain is a big player claiming much of Southern and Eastern Africa as you see in pink. Other claims were made by Germany in green and Italy in the lime-colored green and France in blue. So, let's circle back to the idea of real-life minerals, much like the idea of vibranium in Black Panther. Only in Black Panther, we see how their isolation allowed them to benefit from their own resources versus Europeans taking them and you get the point. Yes, I love the movie, but I also love the historical connection. Now, Cecil Rhodes formed the De Beers Mining Company as he rushed to mine diamonds in Southern Africa. It was said that he controlled 90% of the world's diamond production. Rhodes eventually became the Prime Minister of the Cape Colony under the British hands. And unfortunately, his terribly racist policies and exploitation of Africans will pave the way to apartheid in the future. He was the guy that also had this dream of building the railroad across Africa from Cape Town in South Africa to Cairo in Egypt, and it never was completed. Partially cuz they didn't colonize or control all those different areas. And as I always say, it wasn't like Africans just handed over the keys to the castle. There was significant movements against Europeans and many resisted. The most successful nation would be Ethiopia, who was able to defend their nation against the Italians, most memorable at their famous Battle of Adwa. Ethiopians had access to gunpowder weapons and it kind of leveled that playing field. In South Africa, the Zulu Kingdom was established and was well-organized state. However, the British presented an ultimatum to the Zulu King, which involved them disbanding their army and abandoning their key cultural traditions. No independent nation would oblige such requests, and so it led to fighting, which was known as the Anglo-Zulu War. Unfortunately, the British won that war and the region came under their dominion. Often, fighting was also inspired by their own religious ideals for protection. The Xhosa people in South Africa also resisted British imperialism. They were in the region east of the Cape Colony. Not only did they fight back, but they also turned to their religious beliefs for assistance. The cattle-killing movement was started when a Xhosa prophetess claimed that if they killed all their cattle and destroyed their corn, their ancestors would drive out the European settlers. Unfortunately, they lost to the British and suffered also mass starvation because of their actions. Now, another major element of history is mass migrations. And because the Atlantic slave trade was abolished, we will see that there's going to be new migrations and this need for low-wage laborers as countries were attempting to gain still these raw resources. People from British India migrated to British-controlled South Africa and East Africa typically as indentured servants. Additionally, specialized laborers like British engineers and geologists migrated to the region as well and settled there. Now, one of the effects of these migrations will be the creation of ethnic enclaves, specifically in the number of Indians in East and Southern Africa. Durban is one of these examples in South Africa that has a very, very large Indian population in South Africa. Now, as we enter the final period of our course, 1900 to present, by now you know this is the era of the World Wars. We know this is the Cold War tensions. We know it's also the era of decolonization. Now, colonized people fought in both the World Wars on the sides of their mother country as we've previously discussed. After World War I, Italy went back to Ethiopia to increase their land holdings in 1935 and the League of Nations was like, hey Mussolini, you should not do that. They had some empty promises and some basic sanctions, but nothing stopped them from briefly controlling Ethiopia. Now, Germany, we know will lose World War I and they will also then lose their colonies in the Treaty of Versailles after World War I, but those colonies were not granted independence and said they were now falling under control of Britain, France, or Belgium. Now, nationalist efforts begin to brew during World War II and some colonies were able to negotiate their independence while others achieved independence through armed struggle and we've said that before. Now, as we were just talking about Ethiopia, they will regain their independence after Mussolini's short stint of power. Italy, you know, joined the war as one of the Axis powers in 1940 and focused really most of their offensives in Africa and the Middle East. Now, independence was gained with the assistance of the British who fought against Italy in World War II. South Africa is a little trickier or a lot trickier. Now, you can argue that South Africa's independence was negotiated, but you could also argue that it was gained through a brutal resistance campaign. Recall that the Dutch established a colony at Cape Town in 1652. The Dutch and the British will fight over the colonial holdings, which will cause the Dutch and their descendants to migrate inland. By the 1900s, the British and the Afrikaners were able to unite together to form the Union of South Africa and negotiate their independence from Great Britain in 1910 and it remained part of the British Commonwealth. So, yes, South Africa negotiated their independence. Minus that part where the people in control were still white people in Africa. Indigenous Africans are denied rights by the minority Afrikaner or National Party in control and they formed the African National Congress to vocalize their wishes of the African people. The National Party started a policy of apartheid in 1948, which is a legal segregation based upon distinct racial classifications, which included black or native Africans, those who were white with those Dutch or British ethnic ties, and we cannot forget the sizable Asian population, mostly Indian or Chinese who came as indentured servants in the late 1800s. Plus, there's a group known as colored, which is tricky to understand because it's different than what we think of maybe as mixed or biracial. But, that is somewhat true as well, but they are a distinct cultural group that speak Afrikaans. So, while independence in 1910 was a negotiated, a large majority of the population was still under control of the National Party. This controlling party required black South Africans to carry ID with them at all times. Black people were not allowed to vote. They could only live in certain areas. Now, Nelson Mandela is a key leader in the African National Congress or the ANC and sought to end these discriminatory practices. Like Gandhi, Mandela and his fellow members of the ANC used nonviolent tactics like strikes and demonstrations to protest apartheid as well as civil disobedience. One of the most famous acts of disobedience was Sharpeville in 1960. Roughly 7,000 ANC members came to the police station to protest ID passbooks and began to burn those passbooks in an act of defiance and then offer themselves up for arrest. The police came and fired on the protesters. Another one of the famous events in South Africa was the Soweto uprising in 1976. The National Party made it a new law that required schooling to be in Afrikaans along with English versus native languages. Students, students just like you, left their school to march against this government directive. However, they were met with a heavily armed police force who fired tear gas and ammunition on the demonstrators killing over 176, many who were students. Now, throughout the '70s and '80s, people in the governments around the world really started launching international campaigns to boycott South Africa and it wasn't until F.W. de Klerk was elected president in 1989 that apartheid was dismantled. During that time, he also freed Mandela in 1990, they got a new constitution in '91, and that was all peaceful. In 1994, Nelson Mandela was elected as president. Now, development has been difficult in most of Africa as the roots of colonization and imperialism have lasting impacts. Learning objective 7.8 is for us to understand the causes and the consequences of mass atrocities, but I know you probably talked about the Holocaust or the Armenian genocide, which fits under that. But, another illustrative example could be the Rwandan genocide. Now, Rwanda started as a German colony until they lost World War I and then it switched into Belgian hands where they utilized indirect rule and really allowed the existing Rwandan leadership kind of the right to rule. However, the legacy of imperialism included ingrained racist and oppressive policies that really classified people based on physical characteristics and roles within their society. Belgians required Rwandans to carry ID cards showing their ethnic group. Sounds familiar, right? Tutsis were originally cattle herders before colonization and they were a minority within Rwanda. They controlled the monarchy and the Belgians believed they were superior to the Hutus who were the majority ethnic group in Rwanda. Post World War II, Hutu activism and a push for democracy overthrew the Tutsi monarchy and Belgian influence where they then gained independence in 1962. So, you would think that the majority party, the majority of people would gain control and this is what happened. However, the Belgians had favored that minority group. So, then the Belgians switched groups of who they supported and now they went behind the Hutus. Now, these classifications created divisions and eventually will lead to the genocidal plans to come to fruition. Government-sponsored radio stations started to call on ordinary Rwandan citizens to murder their neighbors. Within 3 months in 1994, some 800,000 people had been slaughtered. Now, many consider this lack of action by the United Nations, a peacekeeping international organization, as a failure or at least one of their weaknesses. Since then, there has been a lot of work at reconciliation in Rwanda, but still the legacy of the genocide is still fresh in many people's minds. So, there you have it, a review of Eastern and South Africa from the beginning of the course all the way to the end. So, queue that clock and let's get to the 1-minute recap. Great Zimbabwe and Aksum in Ethiopia were early states in Eastern Africa. Great Zimbabwe was largely connected to the Swahili coast and the Indian Ocean trade network. Iron, ivory, animal skins were exchanged from Africa into the network, but religion came back in, specifically the spread of Islam into Africa. Let's not forget about bananas coming on in. Ethiopia has a sizable Christian population as well. Then came the Portuguese and their explorers. Dias reached the Cape of Good Hope in Southern Africa. Vasco da Gama will round the Cape and reach India. Now, Europeans are in the Indian Ocean also along the Swahili coast. Industrial Revolution leads to them wanting resources. Diamonds and minerals are in Southern Africa. Then came the Berlin Conference. Lots of resistance. Now, the Zulu lost against the British in the Anglo-Zulu War. The Xhosa will have the cattle-killing movement as they turn to their religious beliefs. Ethiopians will fight and they will win to defend their lands, but the map still looks really colonized minus Ethiopia. Then came the World Wars and nationalist movements, many achieve independence, but South Africa is a little confusing because they negotiated yet apartheid began. So, feels a little colonized yet. Apartheid lasts until the '90s with lots of resistance. Sharpeville protest, Soweto uprising, Mandela is jailed, world boycott South Africa. De Klerk eventually frees Mandela and ends apartheid laws. Mandela is elected in 1994. But, the effects of imperialism and colonization run deep as we see the tragedies of the Rwandan genocide. What's next? Only time will tell. If you feel like this was helpful, hit that like button and subscribe to stay along for the ride as I help you review region by region. I hope this helped you learn about yesterday to better understand today so we can all write a better tomorrow. Keep studying and organizing all these events on the timeline that I allowed for you in the description below. But, until next time, keep up the good work. See you.